README.md, before:

# Proton Beam ⚡

> Convert Nostr events from JSON to Protocol Buffers at lightspeed

[![Rust](https://img.shields.io/badge/rust-1.70%2B-orange.svg)](https://www.rust-lang.org/)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg)](LICENSE)

Proton Beam is a high-performance Rust tool for converting [Nostr](https://nostr.com) events from JSON format to Protocol Buffers (protobuf). It provides both a CLI tool for batch processing and a daemon for real-time relay monitoring.

## Features

- 🚀 **High Performance**: Process 100+ events/second with validated signatures
- 🔒 **Full Validation**: Verify event IDs (SHA-256) and Schnorr signatures
- 📦 **Efficient Storage**: ~10-25% smaller than minified JSON
- 🔄 **Real-time Processing**: Connect to multiple Nostr relays simultaneously
- 🎯 **Smart Deduplication**: Events stored once across all relay sources
- 🔍 **Advanced Filtering**: Filter by event kind, author, or tags
- 🌐 **Auto-discovery**: Automatically discover and connect to new relays
- 📊 **Progress Tracking**: Beautiful progress bars for batch operations

## Quick Start

### Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/proton-beam.git
cd proton-beam

# Build all binaries
cargo build --release

# Install binaries
cargo install --path proton-beam-cli
cargo install --path proton-beam-daemon
```

### CLI Usage

Convert a `.jsonl` file:

```bash
proton-beam convert events.jsonl
```

Read from stdin:

```bash
cat events.jsonl | proton-beam convert -
```

Specify output directory:

```bash
proton-beam convert events.jsonl --output-dir ./pb_data
```

### Daemon Usage

Start with default configuration:

```bash
proton-beam-daemon start
```

Use custom config:

```bash
proton-beam-daemon start --config config.toml
```

Request historical events:

```bash
proton-beam-daemon start --since 1697000000
```

## Project Structure

```
proton-beam/
├── proton-beam-core/      # Core library (protobuf + conversion)
├── proton-beam-cli/       # CLI tool
├── proton-beam-daemon/    # Relay monitoring daemon
├── docs/                  # Documentation
│   ├── PROJECT_PLAN.md    # Complete project plan
│   └── PROTOBUF_SCHEMA.md # Protobuf schema documentation
└── examples/              # Sample events and configs
```

## Documentation

- **[Project Status](docs/STATUS.md)**: Current implementation status and progress
- **[Project Plan](docs/PROJECT_PLAN.md)**: Complete architecture and implementation plan
- **[Protobuf Schema](docs/PROTOBUF_SCHEMA.md)**: Detailed schema documentation
- **[Documentation Index](docs/INDEX.md)**: Complete documentation navigation
- **API Documentation**: Run `cargo doc --open`

## Configuration Example

`config.toml` for daemon:

```toml
[daemon]
output_dir = "./nostr_events"
batch_size = 500
log_level = "info"

[relays]
urls = [
    "wss://relay.damus.io",
    "wss://nos.lol",
    "wss://relay.primal.net",
    "wss://relay.nostr.band",
    "wss://relay.snort.social",
]
auto_discover = true
max_relays = 50

[filters]
kinds = []        # Empty = all kinds
authors = []      # Empty = all authors

[storage]
deduplicate = true
use_index = true
```

## How It Works

1. **JSON Input**: Accepts Nostr events in JSON format (from files, stdin, or relays)
2. **Validation**: Verifies event ID (SHA-256) and Schnorr signature
3. **Conversion**: Converts to efficient protobuf binary format
4. **Storage**: Organizes events by date (`YYYY_MM_DD.pb`) with length-delimited encoding
5. **Indexing**: Maintains SQLite index for fast deduplication and querying

## Performance

- **Throughput**: 100+ events/second (with full validation)
- **Storage**: ~10-25% smaller than minified JSON
- **Memory**: < 100MB under normal load
- **Validation**: 100% accuracy using nostr-sdk

## Development Status

✅ **Phase 1 Complete**: Core library fully implemented and tested
✅ **Phase 1.5 Complete**: Enhanced API with builder, Display, Serde, FromIterator
🚧 **Next Phase**: CLI Tool

See [STATUS.md](docs/STATUS.md) for detailed progress.

### Roadmap

- [x] Phase 1: Core library & protobuf schema ✅
- [x] Phase 1.5: Enhanced API features ✅
- [ ] Phase 2: CLI tool ⏳
- [ ] Phase 3: SQLite index & deduplication
- [ ] Phase 4: Relay daemon (core)
- [ ] Phase 5: Relay discovery & advanced features
- [ ] Phase 6: Testing, documentation & polish

## Use Cases

- **Event Archival**: Efficiently archive Nostr events for long-term storage
- **Data Analysis**: Process large datasets of Nostr events
- **Relay Backups**: Create compressed backups of relay data
- **Research**: Analyze Nostr protocol usage and patterns
- **Integration**: Use as a library in other Rust projects

## Technical Details

### Protobuf Schema

```protobuf
// Named ProtoEvent to avoid conflicts with nostr-sdk::Event
message ProtoEvent {
  string id = 1;              // Event ID (hex)
  string pubkey = 2;          // Public key (hex)
  int64 created_at = 3;       // Unix timestamp
  int32 kind = 4;             // Event kind
  repeated Tag tags = 5;      // Tags
  string content = 6;         // Content
  string sig = 7;             // Signature (hex)
}

message Tag {
  repeated string values = 1;
}
```

### Storage Format

Events are stored in date-organized files using length-delimited protobuf:

```
./nostr_events/
├── 2025_10_13.pb       # All events from Oct 13
├── 2025_10_14.pb
├── errors.jsonl        # Malformed events
└── .index.db           # SQLite index
```

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please read [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) before submitting PRs.

### Development Setup

```bash
# Clone the repo
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/proton-beam.git
cd proton-beam

# Run tests
cargo test --all

# Run tests with output
cargo test --all -- --nocapture

# Format code
cargo fmt --all

# Lint
cargo clippy --all-targets --all-features
```

## Dependencies

- [nostr-sdk](https://github.com/rust-nostr/nostr): Nostr protocol implementation
- [prost](https://github.com/tokio-rs/prost): Protocol Buffers for Rust
- [tokio](https://tokio.rs/): Async runtime
- [clap](https://github.com/clap-rs/clap): CLI argument parsing
- [rusqlite](https://github.com/rusqlite/rusqlite): SQLite bindings

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details

## Acknowledgments

- [Nostr Protocol](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips) - The protocol this tool supports
- [nostr-sdk](https://github.com/rust-nostr/nostr) - Excellent Rust implementation
- Protocol Buffers - Efficient serialization format

## Support

- 📖 [Documentation](docs/)
- 🐛 [Issue Tracker](https://github.com/yourusername/proton-beam/issues)
- 💬 [Discussions](https://github.com/yourusername/proton-beam/discussions)

## Related Projects

- [nostr-tools](https://github.com/nbd-wtf/nostr-tools) - JavaScript Nostr library
- [nostr-rs-relay](https://github.com/scsibug/nostr-rs-relay) - Rust Nostr relay
- [nostcat](https://github.com/blakejakopovic/nostcat) - Nostr CLI tool

---

**Built with ⚡ and 🦀 by the Nostr community**

Commit message:

Make it more clear it's experimental

README.md, after:

# Proton Beam ⚡

> Convert Nostr events from JSON to Protocol Buffers at lightspeed

[![Rust](https://img.shields.io/badge/rust-1.70%2B-orange.svg)](https://www.rust-lang.org/)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg)](LICENSE)

Proton Beam is a highly experimental (and will eventually be a high-performance) Rust tool for converting [Nostr](https://nostr.com) events from JSON format to Protocol Buffers (protobuf). It provides both a CLI tool for batch processing and a daemon for real-time relay monitoring.

## Features

- 🚀 **High Performance**: Process 100+ events/second with validated signatures
- 🔒 **Full Validation**: Verify event IDs (SHA-256) and Schnorr signatures
- 📦 **Efficient Storage**: ~10-25% smaller than minified JSON
- 🔄 **Real-time Processing**: Connect to multiple Nostr relays simultaneously
- 🎯 **Smart Deduplication**: Events stored once across all relay sources
- 🔍 **Advanced Filtering**: Filter by event kind, author, or tags
- 🌐 **Auto-discovery**: Automatically discover and connect to new relays
- 📊 **Progress Tracking**: Beautiful progress bars for batch operations

## Quick Start

### Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/proton-beam.git
cd proton-beam

# Build all binaries
cargo build --release

# Install binaries
cargo install --path proton-beam-cli
cargo install --path proton-beam-daemon
```

### CLI Usage

Convert a `.jsonl` file:

```bash
proton-beam convert events.jsonl
```

Read from stdin:

```bash
cat events.jsonl | proton-beam convert -
```

Specify output directory:

```bash
proton-beam convert events.jsonl --output-dir ./pb_data
```

### Daemon Usage

Start with default configuration:

```bash
proton-beam-daemon start
```

Use custom config:

```bash
proton-beam-daemon start --config config.toml
```

Request historical events:

```bash
proton-beam-daemon start --since 1697000000
```

## Project Structure

```
proton-beam/
├── proton-beam-core/      # Core library (protobuf + conversion)
├── proton-beam-cli/       # CLI tool
├── proton-beam-daemon/    # Relay monitoring daemon
├── docs/                  # Documentation
│   ├── PROJECT_PLAN.md    # Complete project plan
│   └── PROTOBUF_SCHEMA.md # Protobuf schema documentation
└── examples/              # Sample events and configs
```

## Documentation

- **[Project Status](docs/STATUS.md)**: Current implementation status and progress
- **[Project Plan](docs/PROJECT_PLAN.md)**: Complete architecture and implementation plan
- **[Protobuf Schema](docs/PROTOBUF_SCHEMA.md)**: Detailed schema documentation
- **[Documentation Index](docs/INDEX.md)**: Complete documentation navigation
- **API Documentation**: Run `cargo doc --open`

## Configuration Example

`config.toml` for daemon:

```toml
[daemon]
output_dir = "./nostr_events"
batch_size = 500
log_level = "info"

[relays]
urls = [
    "wss://relay.damus.io",
    "wss://nos.lol",
    "wss://relay.primal.net",
    "wss://relay.nostr.band",
    "wss://relay.snort.social",
]
auto_discover = true
max_relays = 50

[filters]
kinds = []        # Empty = all kinds
authors = []      # Empty = all authors

[storage]
deduplicate = true
use_index = true
```

## How It Works

1. **JSON Input**: Accepts Nostr events in JSON format (from files, stdin, or relays)
2. **Validation**: Verifies event ID (SHA-256) and Schnorr signature
3. **Conversion**: Converts to efficient protobuf binary format
4. **Storage**: Organizes events by date (`YYYY_MM_DD.pb`) with length-delimited encoding
5. **Indexing**: Maintains SQLite index for fast deduplication and querying

## Performance

- **Throughput**: 100+ events/second (with full validation)
- **Storage**: ~10-25% smaller than minified JSON
- **Memory**: < 100MB under normal load
- **Validation**: 100% accuracy using nostr-sdk

## Development Status

✅ **Phase 1 Complete**: Core library fully implemented and tested
✅ **Phase 1.5 Complete**: Enhanced API with builder, Display, Serde, FromIterator
🚧 **Next Phase**: CLI Tool

See [STATUS.md](docs/STATUS.md) for detailed progress.

### Roadmap

- [x] Phase 1: Core library & protobuf schema ✅
- [x] Phase 1.5: Enhanced API features ✅
- [ ] Phase 2: CLI tool ⏳
- [ ] Phase 3: SQLite index & deduplication
- [ ] Phase 4: Relay daemon (core)
- [ ] Phase 5: Relay discovery & advanced features
- [ ] Phase 6: Testing, documentation & polish

## Use Cases

- **Event Archival**: Efficiently archive Nostr events for long-term storage
- **Data Analysis**: Process large datasets of Nostr events
- **Relay Backups**: Create compressed backups of relay data
- **Research**: Analyze Nostr protocol usage and patterns
- **Integration**: Use as a library in other Rust projects

## Technical Details

### Protobuf Schema

```protobuf
// Named ProtoEvent to avoid conflicts with nostr-sdk::Event
message ProtoEvent {
  string id = 1;              // Event ID (hex)
  string pubkey = 2;          // Public key (hex)
  int64 created_at = 3;       // Unix timestamp
  int32 kind = 4;             // Event kind
  repeated Tag tags = 5;      // Tags
  string content = 6;         // Content
  string sig = 7;             // Signature (hex)
}

message Tag {
  repeated string values = 1;
}
```

### Storage Format

Events are stored in date-organized files using length-delimited protobuf:

```
./nostr_events/
├── 2025_10_13.pb       # All events from Oct 13
├── 2025_10_14.pb
├── errors.jsonl        # Malformed events
└── .index.db           # SQLite index
```

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please read [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) before submitting PRs.

### Development Setup

```bash
# Clone the repo
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/proton-beam.git
cd proton-beam

# Run tests
cargo test --all

# Run tests with output
cargo test --all -- --nocapture

# Format code
cargo fmt --all

# Lint
cargo clippy --all-targets --all-features
```

## Dependencies

- [nostr-sdk](https://github.com/rust-nostr/nostr): Nostr protocol implementation
- [prost](https://github.com/tokio-rs/prost): Protocol Buffers for Rust
- [tokio](https://tokio.rs/): Async runtime
- [clap](https://github.com/clap-rs/clap): CLI argument parsing
- [rusqlite](https://github.com/rusqlite/rusqlite): SQLite bindings

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details

## Acknowledgments

- [Nostr Protocol](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips) - The protocol this tool supports
- [nostr-sdk](https://github.com/rust-nostr/nostr) - Excellent Rust implementation
- Protocol Buffers - Efficient serialization format

## Support

- 📖 [Documentation](docs/)
- 🐛 [Issue Tracker](https://github.com/yourusername/proton-beam/issues)
- 💬 [Discussions](https://github.com/yourusername/proton-beam/discussions)

## Related Projects

- [nostr-tools](https://github.com/nbd-wtf/nostr-tools) - JavaScript Nostr library
- [nostr-rs-relay](https://github.com/scsibug/nostr-rs-relay) - Rust Nostr relay
- [nostcat](https://github.com/blakejakopovic/nostcat) - Nostr CLI tool

---

**Built with ⚡ and 🦀 by the Nostr community**
